<metadata>{"title": "Matryoshka Representation Learning", "abstract": "  Learned representations are a central component in modern ML systems, serving\na multitude of downstream tasks. When training such representations, it is\noften the case that computational and statistical constraints for each\ndownstream task are unknown. In this context rigid, fixed capacity\nrepresentations can be either over or under-accommodating to the task at hand.\nThis leads us to ask: can we design a flexible representation that can adapt to\nmultiple downstream tasks with varying computational resources? Our main\ncontribution is Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) which encodes\ninformation at different granularities and allows a single embedding to adapt\nto the computational constraints of downstream tasks. MRL minimally modifies\nexisting representation learning pipelines and imposes no additional cost\nduring inference and deployment. MRL learns coarse-to-fine representations that\nare at least as accurate and rich as independently trained low-dimensional\nrepresentations. The flexibility within the learned Matryoshka Representations\noffer: (a) up to 14x smaller embedding size for ImageNet-1K classification at\nthe same level of accuracy; (b) up to 14x real-world speed-ups for large-scale\nretrieval on ImageNet-1K and 4K; and (c) up to 2% accuracy improvements for\nlong-tail few-shot classification, all while being as robust as the original\nrepresentations. Finally, we show that MRL extends seamlessly to web-scale\ndatasets (ImageNet, JFT) across various modalities -- vision (ViT, ResNet),\nvision + language (ALIGN) and language (BERT). MRL code and pretrained models\nare open-sourced at https://github.com/RAIVNLab/MRL.\n", "published": "2022-05-26T04:33:56Z"}</metadata>

<text>Summary:

Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) is a novel approach to learning flexible representations that can adapt to the computational constraints of downstream tasks. The key idea is to encode information at different granularities within a single high-dimensional embedding vector, allowing the representation to be used effectively across a range of applications.

Key Findings:
- MRL can produce representations that are as accurate as independently trained low-dimensional models, but with up to 14x smaller embedding size for ImageNet-1K classification.
- MRL enables up to 14x real-world speed-ups for large-scale retrieval on ImageNet-1K and 4K datasets, by allowing adaptive shortlisting and re-ranking.
- MRL can provide up to 2% accuracy improvements for long-tail few-shot classification, while being as robust as original representations.
- MRL seamlessly extends to web-scale datasets and modalities like vision, vision+language, and language.

Keywords: Flexible representations, Multifidelity, Adaptive deployment, Large-scale retrieval, Few-shot learning

Example Questions:
Q: How does MRL enable efficient large-scale retrieval compared to using a single fixed-size representation?
A: MRL learns a nested set of representations at different granularities within a single high-dimensional vector. This allows using a low-dimensional representation for an initial shortlisting step, followed by re-ranking with a higher-dimensional representation. This adaptive retrieval approach can provide up to 14x real-world speedups compared to using a single fixed-size representation.

Q: How does the performance of MRL representations compare to independently trained low-dimensional models on few-shot learning tasks?
A: MRL representations perform comparably to independently trained low-dimensional models across various few-shot learning benchmarks, while providing up to 2% higher accuracy on long-tail classes. This demonstrates the ability of MRL to capture the underlying class hierarchy and semantics even in tight information bottlenecks.

Q: How does MRL handle the trade-off between representation size and model robustness?
A: Experiments show that MRL representations are at least as robust as independently trained fixed-size representations when evaluated on out-of-distribution datasets like ImageNetV2, ImageNet-R, and ImageNet-A. In some cases, the lower-dimensional MRL representations even outperform the higher-dimensional baselines, indicating that the multifidelity nature of MRL does not compromise robustness.</text>